taking cold showers has become a normal
part of my life even though I've taken
many cold showers still suck every
single time to this day but it takes me
considerably less effort than the first
time I took one besides the many
physical benefits of cold showers let's
talk about the philosophy behind them
[Music]
first of all I want to thank Joshua for
his very generous PayPal donation thank
you very much this really helps me to
continue making videos and move this
channel forward now let's dive in well
some people see taking cold showers as
the panacea for overall health that will
solve all our mental and physical
problems I would disagree on that I've
been taking cold showers since 2014 and
doing so did not always prevent me from
getting sick or getting depressed but I
always do feel better after a cold
shower mentally as well as physically
and I've become more resistant to cold
in the winter but most of the benefits I
have experienced are mental and can be
brought back to different philosophical
ideas that I will share with you now
let's start with the dynamic of desire
and aversion human beings as well as
animals make a discernment between the
things they like and don't like
this mechanism is valuable for survival
avoiding certain things that our life
threatening can literally save our lives
that's why zebras avoid lions and also
why I avoid standing in the middle of a
fire however so often people avoid a
simple discomfort that isn't
life-threatening but actually necessary
for personal growth if we avoid the
things we averse we will never be able
to achieve certain goals if we want a
muscular body for example we need to
train our muscles and if you want to be
heard we need to speak up but what holds
us back the fear of discomfort here's a
quote from stoic philosopher and
statesman Seneca it is not because
things are difficult that we do not dare
but because we do not dare things are
difficult
and quote in other words if you want the
things to become easier
we should become braver this is where
cold showers come in I think that most
people especially in the West are quite
averse to cold showers since most of
them are used to hot streaming water at
home which makes bathing rather a
comforting and soothing experience then
a refreshing and invigorating one thus
in general people that are used to bathe
in warm water will avoid the discomfort
of cold showers years before I even
considered taking a cold shower I spent
a few months in Indonesia where I stayed
in and around the city of bandung this
really was a fantastic experience except
for the fact that on many occasions I
did not have access to warm water even
in some hotels the warm water just
wasn't there this is probably because
the majority of Indonesians take cold
showers every day
moreover the major religion in Indonesia
is Islam and devoted Muslims that pray
five times a day wash themselves at
least five times a day with cold water
when I stayed at the local people
instead of adapting myself to their
habit of bathing with a bucket of cold
water each morning I put water in a pan
cooked it mingled it with cold water in
a bucket so I could have my nice warm
quote-unquote shower yeah how was it was
and this reflected in my overall stance
in life I would always avoid the things
I averse even if they were minor
discomforts here's a quote from stoic
philosopher Epictetus remember that
following desire promises the attainment
of debt of which you are desirous and a
virgin promises the avoiding that to
which you are averse
however he who fails to obtain the
object of his desire is disappointed and
he who incurs the object of his aversion
ratchet and quote in this context the
idea behind taking cold showers is that
we deliberately expose ourselves to what
we averse we might desire a nice warm
water on our skin but we give ourselves
the opposite instead by doing this we
train ourselves in becoming
resilient towards the things we do not
like it creates a mindset of
acknowledging not liking something and
doing it anyway
the more we do this the less ratchet
will be when incurring what we averse
ancient Roman Emperor and stoic
philosopher Marcus Aurelius advised us
to engage in the payment at sea Omalu
translated negative visualization when
we do this in the morning we prepare
ourselves for the adversity we could
meet during the day ahead I quote when
you wake up in the morning tell yourself
the people I deal with today will be
meddling ungrateful arrogant dishonest
jealous and surely they are like this
because they can't tell good from evil
and quote now when visualizing adversity
is a cognitive way to brace ourselves
for pain taking a cold shower can be
considered a negative visualization in
the flesh that prepares us for the
difficulties that the day will bring
because we have already faced one demon
by taking a cold shower the threshold of
facing other demons becomes lower but
the wisdom of cold showers goes even
deeper in my youth we often spend our
summers in Spain with my brother and a
friend of ours we would spend every
single day at the pool swimming and
chilling out now basically we were a
bunch of pansies Baghdad especially
myself dreading the first touch with the
cold water that we had to go through
before we could swim so before we jumped
in we played this peculiar psychological
game of running to the pool to jump
without jumping challenging each other
to jump first this frustrating activity
could easily take up 10 minutes or more
until one of us finally made a jump and
the others fall out after I jumped it
always amazed me how much worse the mind
made the experience compared to how bad
it
is the same goes with taking a cold
shower
the first seconds are the worst but
after a minute or so you actually adapt
to the cold and it isn't so bad anymore
like being in a cold swimming pool after
a while it's pretty good actually
I have to agree with Master Yoda when he
said do or do not there is no try and
quote by taking cold showers we train
ourselves to just go for it when
confronted with a potentially painful
experience no matter how much anxiety we
experience examples of such experiences
are telling someone bad news or a
difficult confrontation at work the cold
shower teaches us that no matter how
dreadful something is at first we will
adapt and it will become bearable some
hardships may be excruciating at first
but after a while they become integrated
and we suffer a lot less I kind of dread
public speaking for example but I've
learned that like a cold shower the
beginning is the worst and when I'm a
few minutes in the discomfort goes away
the ability to push through anxiety
means that fear won't stop us
no matter how terrible it feels this way
we will open doors that we previously
didn't dare to open and by opening those
doors we find pathways to new
possibilities because we have liberated
ourselves from the chains of fear
anxiety is the dizziness of freedom sad
Danish philosopher sir and Kierkegaard
now another thing I learned from the
experiences in Spain is that our minds
make things much worse than they really
are which is basically the cause of our
anxiety after avoiding cold water for
years taking cold showers brought me
back to the days in Spain where I
hesitated and hesitated before I would
make the leap into the cold I
experienced the same bargaining
postponing talking myself out of it etc
our minds are extremely intelligent when
it comes to avoiding pain as they are
able to construct stories with the
complexity of a dissertation simply to
avoid the discomfort of a cold shower
something interesting I've noticed about
taking cold showers
four years is how mindful I've become in
regards to the thoughts that precede it
I can tell instantly if I'm beginning to
hesitate and I know that when I continue
hesitating it will take a long time
before I actually take the step I've
learned that whenever this hesitation
begins the faster I push through the
better no wonder why Taoist philosopher
lao-tzu mentioned this in his work the
daodejing and I quote take care of
difficult problems while they are still
easy do easy things before they become
too hard and quote this principle can
also be used for approaching someone you
find attractive the most effective way
to start a conversation is by
approaching that person as quick as
possible because if you don't you will
start to hesitate
the anxiety builds up and so it becomes
much more difficult to approach becoming
more mindful of these thinking patterns
helps us to identify if we are avoiding
something and if our thoughts are
holding us back this makes it easier to
break that cycle and just go for it
before the task gets even more difficult
the experience with cold showers teaches
us to trust that we will cope even when
our minds tell us the opposite also
courage is a stoic virtue taking cold
showers is a way to build courage by
conquering ourselves in the face of
discomfort instead of going down the
easy road cold showers are small
victories over pain and function as a
metaphor for how we approach our daily
confrontations with the things we averse
which are whether we like it or not part
of our existence as human beings thank
you for watching
you